---
draft: true
slides: ""
url_pdf: ""
title: A measure of the rate of cellular network evolution
subtitle: "Hypotheses: 1) Protein network structure evolves via genetic drift
  over macroevolutionary time scales. 2) Evolutionary divergence among two nodes
  in a network is proportional to the distance between those nodes in the
  network (i.e. the rate of evolution of DDI changes as a function of network
  distance between the main drug targets)."
date: 2020-12-18T05:01:44.891Z
summary: This project aims to show evidence that network evolution using drug
  interaction scores correlates linearly with phylogenetic distance.
url_video: ""
featured: false
external_link: Network Biology
url_slides: ""
tags:
  - Network Biology
links: null
image:
  caption: "A small subset of the Protein-Protein Interaction Network in
    Saccharomyces cerevisiae. source: Wodak Lab"
  focal_point: Smart
  preview_only: true
  filename: featured.jpg
url_code: ""
---
## Background and rationale.

In this chapter, I take a broader perspective on the effect of antibiotics in the cellular network. Here, I propose that cellular responses to antibiotics can reveal insights on network connectivity between drug targets. The combination of multiple compounds in pharmacological treatments opened the field to the study of drug-drug interactions. These types of interactions have been shown to depend on the underlying network topology present between their respective targets. Therefore, drug-drug interaction scores may be a useful metric to address questions on cellular network evolution.

## What is a cellular network?

Cellular networks are representations of the interactions between biological entities within the cell. Networks can be classified depending on the type of interaction (i.e. regulatory, biochemical, binding), and the type of entity (genes, proteins, chaperone-protein). For example, protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks (also known as ‘interactomes’) contain nodes (proteins) connected by edges, which are physical or biochemical interactions among proteins that are usually determined experimentally. PPI networks have been characterized in some model organisms (Ito et al., 2001; Uetz et al., 2005). As for other network types, it is generally agreed that most true interactions are still unknown (Cusick et al., 2005; Ghadie et al., 2018), and the spatial and temporal aspects of the network are completely unresolved (Jin et al., 2013).  This lack of resolution means that comparison between species to evaluate the evolution of biological networks remains very challenging.

## How do cellular networks evolve?

Network evolution occurs as a result of the addition or loss of nodes and edges. For example, the evolution of interactomes may occur through substitutions in proteins which affect physical binding to other proteins or the ability to catalyze a specific metabolic (Jensen, 1976) or signaling reaction (Ghadie et al., 2018). Moreover, additions or losses of nodes as a result of gene duplication and gene loss result in the formation or loss of interactions (Wagner, 2003), altering the topology of the network (Cork and Purugganan, 2004). For example, in the event of gene duplication, a node becomes two new nodes originally with all the same interactions, and in the cases of pseudogenization or subfunctionalization, these interactions may shift as a result of sequence evolution affecting domain-domain interaction motifs (Ghadie et al., 2018). This dynamic can be also extended to biochemical, signaling or regulatory interactions, and similarly other evolution events such as WGD and HGT, result in changes in network topology. All these modifications in cellular networks can give rise to new network motifs resulting in differences in the molecular circuitry between species (Jin et al., 2013), upon which evolutionary mechanisms like drift, positive and purifying selection may act (Mosca et al., 2012). For example, natural selection may remove deleterious connections between components in the network or favor some connections that are advantageous (Mosca et al., 2012). In particular, mutations at interfacial sites are under strong purifying selection, which may explain why centrality in the protein network correlates with sequence conservation (Ghadie et al., 2018). Some related mechanisms that have been proposed to explain differences in genetic networks are niche differentiation and developmental system drift. Briefly, niche differentiation suggests that differences in genetic networks are caused by adaptations to specific environments, such as the use of certain metabolic pathways over others. Meanwhile, developmental systems drift proposes that networks can be altered without an evolutionary penalty if the function of the pathway is preserved (True and Haag, 2001). In addition to this, it is important to mention that the evolutionary rate of PPI networks varies among different modules of the interactome, with some parts being very stable (e.g. protein complexes), and other parts having a higher rate of rewiring resulting in highly variable components (Ghadie et al., 2018). Finally, because of evolutionary dynamics we should expect cellular networks to diverge between species as a function of time. Some data that supports this assumption is the correspondence between protein sequence evolution and network structure, where methods based on network alignment such PathBLAST or GRAAL, coincide with clustering methods based on sequence alignment (Kuchaiev et al., 2010).

## Only the interactomes of a few model species are known, many of which are incomplete.

Unfortunately, interactomic data has only been gathered for a few model organisms, hindering interspecies comparison as well as the testing of hypotheses on network evolution. Some methods such as overlapping orthologous sequences, have been devised to obtain interspecific interactome networks, although this approach is limited by interactome incompleteness. An approach like this has been applied to study host-parasite interactomes, which link viral and human protein interactions to determine the biological processes that take part in viral infection (Ghadie et al., 2018). Another method to circumvent this limitation has been the ancestral reconstruction of interactomes (Jin et al., 2013). Although, this approach is also limited by the small number of species whose interactomes are relatively well-known (E. coli, S. cerevisiae, A. thaliana, C. elegans, D. melanogaster, M. musculus and H. sapiens). In summary, a method to compare interspecific network evolution remains elusive, despite some achievements from different fields.

To address this problem, I propose to use an alternative approach to compare networks based on the idea that network topology of PPI interactions correlates with drug-drug interactions (DDI) scores between drugs that target different proteins in the network. Any network connectivity changes between these targets should modulate the interacting effect of the two proteins applied together.

## Drug-drug interaction can be used as a proxy for network connectivity. 

Drug-drug interactions are quantified using checkerboard analysis of drug concentrations, where a physiological parameter such as inhibition of growth is measured (Cowen, 2008). It has been suggested that DDI scores correspond to network structure and connectivity, as well as the type of perturbation, and the essentiality of the metabolites involved. Lehar et al. (2007) showed using experiments and metabolic flux simulations of the sterol biosynthesis pathway it is possible to correlate local network topologies to different response surfaces.

Epistatic interactions between alleles can be described as synergistic, additive or antagonistic, depending on the effect of different genes over their expected effect if they were independent. Like genetic perturbations, drug interactions are also defined in these statistical terms depending on their combinatorial effects, and they have been used to establish functional connections between genes (Yeh et al., 2009).  For example, synergistic drug interactions occur if the chemical perturbations act on parallel pathways, where each perturbation alone has a small effect and the alternative pathway can compensate for the disruption in the first (Yeh et al., 2009). Alternatively, antagonistic interactions occur in two different ways: in the first case by causing a partial loss of function in two parallel pathways of an essential product, and in the second case as a result of drugs acting in series on the same pathway (Fig. 4A).

These responses can be studied using isobologram plots that represent different physiological effects for a drug combination, and they can be summarized with a single metric that represents the overall interaction.  Different models have been devised to quantify DDI scores, such as the Highest Single Agent (HSA) model, the Loewe’s Additivity model and the Bliss Independence model. For example, the Bliss Independence model quantifies DDI scores as a stochastic process, taking the individual effects of each drug and subtracting their expected combined effect. This yields estimates named bliss scores (ε), that range between -1 and +1, where values of ε close to 0 are non-interacting or additive drug combinations, and significantly negative and significantly positive values are respectively synergies and antagonisms. Bliss scores have been obtained for many drug combinations in high throughput experiments and are used to cluster drugs into categories with similar modes of actions inferred from their interaction scores (e.g. Agarwal et al., 2012). However, most of these studies don’t consider multiple strains or species, and only a few explore interspecific variation of drug drug interactions (Brochado et al., 2017; Spitzer et al., 2011; Robbins et al.,2015). In addition, these studies have not used this data in a comparative phylogenetic approach, and simply state that interspecific variation is due to evolutionary divergence and network differences, without testing many pertinent macroevolutionary questions. As an alternative, I propose to investigate this data using models developed for continuous traits. For example, consider a phylogeny of three bacteria species, where drug-drug interactions have been measured for different combinations. Under this scenario, differences in network topology between species accumulate through time, resulting in changes in the interaction scores for some drug combinations. In this model, I expect to see a higher degree of similarity between closer related species in the interaction scores for most drug combinations, where the variance of drug drug interaction scores increases proportionally as the species diverge. Some of the interaction scores may have small quantitative changes that don’t affect the type of interactions (Fig.4B case 1: changes in additive effects), while others may change qualitatively if ε shifts significantly either in the common ancestor (Fig.4B case 2: change from additivity to antagonism) or in one species (Fig.4B case 3: change from additivity to synergy). The change of ε as a function of time can be modelled as any other continuous trait using different models such as Brownian motion or directed evolution (Ornstein-Uhlenbeck). This type analysis can be performed on the dataset collected by Brochado et al. (2017), which has collected data on 3000 drug combinations in 6 strains of bacteria (3 species, 2 strains each) (Fig. 4C).

##  Investigating modes and rates of network evolution using the comparative method on DDI scores.

Only three studies have looked at interspecific variation of drug-drug interactions. The goal of each of these was pharmacodynamic characterization, rather than comparative or evolutionary analysis, and so no analysis of modes of evolution of DDI traits was conducted. The authors of these papers didn’t provide any evolutionary interpretation for these changes, nor did they analyze or model drug drug interactions as a macroevolutionary trait. These papers have overlooked the potential implications of their findings in the understanding of interspecific variation of drug drug interactions and limit their scope to identifying potential drug combinations for different species without analyzing the similarities and differences found. However, these three datasets provide an important source of data to examine evolutionary patterns in DDI score divergence and evaluate its use for understanding network evolution.

Spitzer et al. (2011) quantified drug interaction scores between fluconazole and 17 other compounds in 4 species of fungi. While no comparative analysis was performed, a cursory inspection of the results suggests the following: out of the 17 drug combinations, 14 showed qualitative differences between species, differing in whether the interaction was classified as synergistic, additive, or antagonistic. The remaining 3 drug combinations showed some level of quantitative change between species (i.e. changes in magnitude within an interaction type). While significance of these results would need to be assessed (preferably in a comparative framework, as I propose to do), they suggest that there is both conservation and change between species in DDI scores.

A more recent paper by the same group collected drug interaction scores for 4 species of fungi; they analyzed combinations of 6 known antifungals x 3600 other compounds (Robbins et al., 2015). Again, the interaction scores showed species-specific variation for most drug combinations. A cursory inspection of the results suggests that the magnitude of DDI change is correlated with the phylogenetic distance, consistent with DDI scores diverging with drift. I formally analyzed this relationship (see preliminary results, below).

The most complete dataset, containing both intraspecific and interspecific analysis of drug drug interactions was generated by Brochado et al. (2017). This study included two strains from each of three species of gamma-proteobacteria: Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. They collected bliss scores for more than 3000 drug combinations and found that 70% of them were species-specific and 20% strain specific.

Studying variation in DDI rather than interactomes have the following advantages: (1) high-throughput experiments are able to collect interspecific DDI data for many drug compounds measuring the effects of their combination; (2) DDI scores correlate somewhat to network topology between targets and (3) differences in the DDI scores may therefore represent genetic variation in the network topology.  Furthermore, the mode of evolution of DDI scores may depend on the type of interaction, meaning that it may well be the case that synergistic and antagonistic DDI may be constrained by selection, while additive DDI may evolve neutrally. This result may highlight differences in network evolution depending on the nodes under consideration. Evolutionary analysis of DDIs can be performed under the framework of the comparative method, since interaction scores are continuous traits; and their values among species are not independent because they are related by common ancestry. The comparative method is a framework for accounting for non-independence of traits related by phylogeny, where their evolution is modelled as a random process (Felsen stein, 1989). Extensions of this model, such as Ornstein-Uhlenbeck, have been used to model stabilizing selection (Butler and King, 2004), and adaptive evolution (Cressler et al., 2015).  I will apply these models to a phylogenetic study of drug-drug interaction scores to determine their mode of evolution.

I will perform this analysis on the dataset collected by Brochado et al. (2018) of 75x75 DDIs in 3 species of gram-negative bacteria (2 strains per species). This analysis will be the first-time drug-drug interaction data has been analyzed using macroevolutionary models.

## Patterns in the evolution of DDIs should correlate with structural characteristics of biological networks (and can be used to produce an evolutionary distance-based network topologies).

High-throughput studies on drug drug interactions may provide us with a rich source of data to devise novel methods capable of bypassing some of the limitations of interspecific network comparison. As described above, Brochado et al. (2017) showed that the type of DDI interaction is dependent on the distance of the two targets in the network (e.g. belonging to same or different processes). Based on this observation, I hypothesize that the rate of change in drug combinations will increase the further away the targets are from each other in the network, in agreement with the observation that synergies are more evolutionary conserved, since they occur mainly between drugs that target the same cellular process. I will test this hypothesis with different techniques commonly used for the analysis of correlated gene expression data or the quantification of phylogenetic evolutionary rates in high dimensional phenotypic data, although other approaches such as network inference or multidimensional reduction techniques may be also applied. Some of the questions that I will address with these analyses are: (1) Is there a correlation between network distance (of known targets) and rate of change in the drug drug interaction? (2) Is the rate of network evolution increasing additively? (3) Can we use evolutionary rates between targets to predict network topology?